# STFDiff: Remote Sensing Image Spatiotemporal Fusion with Diffusion Models 

## Abstract
*Spatiotemporal fusion (STF) methods aim to blend satellite images with different spatial and
temporal resolutions to support more frequent and precise monitoring. In the past decades,
amounts of STF methods have been developed with remarkable success. However, among
the existing methods, the traditional methods rely on the linear assumption and fail for
complex and diverse scenes with great dynamics. The deep learning-based methods suffer
from the spatial, temporal and spectral uncertainties in STF and the mode collapse problem
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) for remote sensing images with complex scenes.
To address these problems, we propose a novel spatiotemporal fusion method with diffusion
models (STFDiff) that merges a coarse image at the prediction date and the coarse-fine image
pairs acquired at other dates to generate the fine image at the prediction date. STFDiff
generates the fine image via repeated refinement with initialized Gaussian noise under the
control of the prior images acquired at other dates. At each iteration, the noise is predicted
through a conditional noise predictor dual-stream Unet (DS-Unet), which enhances the noise
features by subtracting the extracted features from the dual-stream encoders (DS-encoders).
The noise is then gradually removed, and finally the fine image is generated with similar
spatial details to the fine images and temporal dynamics to the coarse images. Comprehensive
experiments on two public datasets and one personally collected dataset demonstrate that
STFDiff outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. To further verify the applicability
of STFDiff on downstream tasks, we compared the K-means clustering results on the fusion
images generated by different methods. The results show that the classification results of
STFDiff are the most consistent with the actual images and obtain ∼ 2% mean intersection
over union (mIoU) improvement over the SOTA methods.*

STFDiff is accepted by the Information Fusion (2024). [Paper link](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1566253524002835).

This repository is dedicated to building a unified algorithm library for STF. 
It currently incorporates many existing SOTA methods. 
Detailed usage instructions and training weights for STFDiff will be gradually released as they are organized.

# Citation
If you find this code repository and our paper useful, please star and cite:
```bibtex
@article{huang2024stfdiff,
  title={STFDiff: Remote sensing image spatiotemporal fusion with diffusion models},
  author={Huang, He and He, Wei and Zhang, Hongyan and Xia, Yu and Zhang, Liangpei},
  journal={Information Fusion},
  pages={102505},
  year={2024},
  publisher={Elsevier}
}
@Online{stfrepo,
  accessed = {2023-12-27},
  author   = {Huang, He and Wei, He},
  title    = {A unified algorithm library for spatiotemporal fusion},
  url      = {https://github.com/prowDIY/STF},
  note     = {Forked from: https://github.com/huang-he99/STF},
}
@article{song2022remote,
  title={Remote sensing image spatiotemporal fusion via a generative adversarial network with one prior image pair},
  author={Song, Yiyao and Zhang, Hongyan and Huang, He and Zhang, Liangpei},
  journal={IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing},
  volume={60},
  pages={1--17},
  year={2022},
  publisher={IEEE}
}
@article{zhang2020remote,
  title={Remote sensing image spatiotemporal fusion using a generative adversarial network},
  author={Zhang, Hongyan and Song, Yiyao and Han, Chang and Zhang, Liangpei},
  journal={IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing},
  volume={59},
  number={5},
  pages={4273--4286},
  year={2020},
  publisher={IEEE}
}
```
